<object data="‪C:\Users\Corey\Downloads\Writing Sample.pdf" type="application/pdf" width="750px" height="750px">
    <embed src="‪C:\Users\Corey\Downloads\Writing Sample.pdf" type="application/pdf">
        <p>This browser does not support PDFs. Please download the PDF to view it: <a href="‪C:\Users\Corey\Downloads\Writing Sample.pdf">Download PDF</a>.</p>
    </embed>
</object>

### Abstract

Statistical analysis is used to change the way baseball is played. Data is used to impact decisions made by players, managers, and executives. Numbers have impacted players’ values and playstyles. Innovations with technology can lead to new methods used in baseball. Technology and statistics will work together and continue to make baseball better.

### Introduction

Players and organizations within the MLB, or Major League Baseball, are always looking for an edge, and spend significant financial resources attempting to achieve this edge. Since the baseball industry is a multibillion dollar one, teams are highly incentivized to get the most performance out of their players per dollar spent. Due to the unique nature of baseball having a plethora of data available for innovation and statistical applications, there are many adjustments and technologies that can be used by teams and players in order to improve performance. These advancements have also led to an increase in objectivity when acquiring players and making decisions every game, a shift from the way baseball used to be managed. Massive amounts of data and statistics available for MLB players has led to a change in the way the game is played, a change in the way the game is managed, and a change in the way players are assigned value.

### Impact of numbers

Baseball was played very differently 50 years ago, and even 20 years ago when compared to the game today. The number one goal of teams used to be scoring runners through any means necessary, often including bunting and stealing. Managers did not care that they had one less out to work with as long as the runners advanced or were replaced by the batter. Not only did hitters practice these techniques, starting pitchers were often overused and regularly threw deep into games, amassing pitch counts over one hundred every few days. When the late 1990s rolled around, many hitters around the league started using steroids and abandoned the art of small ball. Viewers and players alike both preferred the method of scoring runs via home runs rather than a series of singles and bunts. A small shift in one aspect of the game led to a domino effect in which other teams looked for new methods to implement in order to be the best team in the league. All of the methods implemented in the past few years have led to increased success for teams and also more value being given to the players, but will it have a negative impact on the game if players and managers keep getting more and more objective in their decisions?

### Changes in the game

##### Pitching

Openers is a term used to describe opening an MLB game by using a relief pitcher in the first inning or two, depending on the pitch count, and then putting in that team’s starting pitcher in the second or third inning. Many teams have been skeptical of the benefits that this system offers, as the only thing an opener guarantees is a relief pitcher chosen by the manager facing the three best hitters of the opposing team. However, the Tampa Bay Rays have fully embraced the use of the opener, leading the MLB in opener uses with 42 in one year, compared to the second ranked Athletics, with seven uses. As a league, there were only 74 instances of an opener being used from the start of the 2018 season through May 19, 2019, only a little more than 1% of the amount of games played in that span. As to the effectiveness of using an opener, the data points to it being effective, although not by much. “That's really the takeaway here, that a year after the opener was reintroduced to the game, it hasn't really taken over. It's been a regular thing for the Rays, but not for most other clubs. We don't have enough information to really say whether it's worked or not, especially for teams who only used it once or twice. It's near impossible to identify games where the headliner would have pitched enough to make it an opener game if he just performed well enough to meet the minimum, which might skew the results, and it's hard to parse out the Rays' success from the fact that they just have good pitchers” (Petriello, 2019). Due to the nature of every single team that has used the opener besides the Rays having such a low sample size, it is impossible to tell the difference between an opener and a regular starter. Adding on to that, the Rays have a very good pitching staff, meaning that they are one of the few teams that can both afford to test out the opener strategy and have the players necessary for it. “It's a potentially small edge in a sport that thrives on finding those edges. Whether or not it even provides that edge remains up for debate, but the Rays will surely keep trying to find out” (Petriello, 2019). Even though the Rays are the sole team with significant usage of the opener, many teams have experimented with the idea, which is important because it signifies teams both know about it and have tried it out. While the Rays are the only team that seem to be using the opener more than a few times, every single team in the league has been changing their hitting approach. 

##### Hitting

Over the last few years, there has been a massive change in hitting philosophy. With the influx of data available to players and teams since the introduction of Statcast in 2015, there has been an increased emphasis on two things: launch angle and exit velocity. This emphasis came as a result of a system named Statcast, which came out in 2015 and utilized cameras in combination with automated equations applied to the footage to determine metrics including exit velocity and launch angle (“Statcast”, n.d.). Hitters have stopped swinging level with the field and instead have angled their bats slightly upward when hitting the ball, as it leads to a higher slugging percentage, and over time, more extra-base hits. The ideal launch angle for hitting home runs is 25 to 35 degrees, along with an exit velocity exceeding 95 miles per hour (Sheinin, 2017). The lower the exit velocity, the higher chance that the hitter makes an out. Players have realized this with the help of statisticians and data analysis. “In 2015 the average launch angle in MLB was 10.5 degrees, but in 2016 the league-wide average rose to 11.5, an increase of about 10 percent. This year [2017], through May 21, the league average is up to 12.8 degrees, another year-to-year increase of almost 12 percent. Clearly, the notion is gaining traction” (Sheinin, 2017). Not only do hitters want to do better, but for some hitters, their livelihoods depend on hitting the ball in the air. If a manager had to choose between two hitters who had identical statistics, but with one of them having both a higher launch angle and exit velocity, the choice would be clear. Since the writing of this article, three years have passed and the scenario posed in the previous sentence is no longer a hypothetical, but instead a reality. Josh Donaldson, who won American League MVP in 2015, said, “If you're 10 years old and your coach says to get on top of the ball, tell them no. Because in the big leagues these things that they call ground balls are outs. They don't pay you for ground balls. They pay you for doubles. They pay you for homers” (Sheinin, 2017). Kids who play baseball look up to the best players for advice and playstyle, and if the best players are saying to hit the ball in the air, the trend will not only be limited to the MLB, but instead spread to all levels of baseball. 

##### Managing

A massive shift in the way baseball is played must be facilitated at all levels of the game, starting with the players, and including the managers and front office. There is a slow shift in the way teams are picking their managers, starting with the Tampa Bay Rays, and most recently with the Minnesota Twins, the managers being Kevin Cash and Rocco Baldelli respectively. Cash became a manager at age 37 and Baldelli became one at age 38, with Baldelli currently being younger than one of the players in his starting lineup. The age of these two managers is important because it signals a shift in how the game is being managed, as younger managers who were also former players are familiar with the statistics being used in the game today, and they also played while these shifts occurred. The results do not lie either, as both Baldelli and Cash won Manager of the Year the last two years while leading their teams to be the division champions. “Cash becomes one of seven skippers to win the BBWAA’s AL Manager of the Year Award at age 42 or younger, joining Minnesota’s Rocco Baldelli (37) in 2019” (“Kevin”, 2020). Following the success of these two managers making most of their decisions according to what the numbers say, it will lead to more teams making decisions based solely on the numbers, rather than the old-school eye test or gut feeling. 

### Future of statistics in baseball

Prior to 2020, the MLB’s statistical analysis systems such as Statcast and Baseball Savant were limited to applying these analyses seconds after the footage was recorded in order to run the algorithms required to produce these statistics. However, there is now a new technology which debuted in 2020 called Hawk-Eye. Hawk-Eye first partnered with the MLB in 2014 when they launched Statcast, which needed to utilize recorded footage in order to gather statistics. Hawk-Eye does not need recorded footage in order to produce statistics or display trajectories for pitches and batted balls, doing it all live instead. “The Hawk-Eye Statcast system utilizes a total of 12 cameras around the park for full-field optical pitch, hit, and player tracking. Five cameras operating at 100 frames per second are primarily dedicated to pitch tracking, while an additional seven cameras are focused on tracking players and batted balls at 50 frames per second” (Jedlovec, 2020). With these improvements being made in the live aspect of the game, the only ones left to catch up are season long advanced statistics for players. Because there is so much raw data, there are stats to explain other stats in baseball, which can lead to problems for both players and organizations. Fans and players alike can cherry pick one statistic that applies to hitting which makes a player more favorable, while they can do the same thing but in the negative sense as well. One of the few downsides of advanced statistics for baseball is that some of them are so obscure that not many people understand the formulas used to calculate them, and often get misused or can be used maliciously. 

### Conclusion

Numbers have been the driving force of change in the MLB since the turn of the century, and they will continue to determine the methods used and decisions made at all levels of the league. An abundance of statistics and data has led to changes in the way the game is played on every level, including pitching, hitting, and managing. There has been a shift toward an objective approach both for managing and playing, and the shift will continue to reign in new methods of playing baseball. The future is promising regarding statistical analysis in tandem with the player and viewer experience, with innovations like Hawk-Eye already showing excellent results. In the end, with billions of dollars on the line, everyone in the baseball industry is looking for an advantage, and those advantages are achieved using statistics. 

###### References

Jedlovec, B. (2020, July 20). Introducing Statcast 2020: Hawk-Eye and Google Cloud. MLB. Retrieved from: https://technology.mlblogs.com/introducing-statcast-2020-hawk-eye-and-google-cloud-a5f5c20321b8 
“Kevin Cash wins AL Manager of the Year Award” (2020, November 10). MLB. Retrieved from: https://www.mlb.com/press-release/press-release-kevin-cash-wins-2020-al-manager-of-the-year-award 
Petriello, M. (2019, May 19). How has a year of ‘the opener’ changed MLB? MLB. Retrieved from: https://www.mlb.com/news/how-has-a-year-of-the-opener-changed-baseball 
Sheinin, D. (2017, June 1). These days in baseball, every batter is trying to find an angle. Washington Post. Retrieved from: https://www.washingtonpost.com/graphics/sports/mlb-launch-angles-story/ 
“Statcast” (n.d.). Statcast Glossary. MLB. Retrieved from: http://m.mlb.com/glossary/statcast 
